Quantum Approaches to Consciousness (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Menu
Browse
Table of Contents
What's New
Random Entry
Chronological
Archives
About
Editorial Information
About the SEP
Editorial Board
How to Cite the SEP
Special Characters
Advanced Tools
Contact
Support SEP
Support the SEP
PDFs for SEP Friends
Make a Donation
SEPIA for Libraries
Entry Navigation
Entry Contents
Bibliography
Academic Tools
Friends PDF Preview
Author and Citation Info
Back to Top
Quantum Approaches to ConsciousnessFirst published Tue Nov 30, 2004; substantive revision Mon May 13, 2024
It is widely accepted that consciousness or, more generally, mental
activity is in some way correlated to the behavior of the material
brain. Since quantum theory is the most fundamental theory of matter
that is currently available, it is a legitimate question to ask
whether quantum theory can help us to understand consciousness.
Several approaches answering this question affirmatively, proposed in
recent decades, will be surveyed. There are three basic types of
corresponding approaches: (1) consciousness is a manifestation of
quantum processes in the brain, (2) quantum concepts are used to
understand conscious mental activity without referring to brain
activity, and (3) matter and consciousness are regarded as dual
aspects of one underlying reality. Major contemporary variants of
these quantum-inspired approaches will be discussed. It will be
pointed out that they make different epistemological assumptions and
use quantum theory in different ways. For each of the approaches
discussed, both problematic and promising features will be
highlighted.
1. Introduction
2. Philosophical Background Assumptions
3. Quantum Brain
3.1 Neurophysiological Levels of Description
3.2 Stapp: Quantum State Reductions and Conscious Acts
3.3 Vitiello and Freeman: Quantum Field Theory of Brain States
3.4 Beck and Eccles: Quantum Mechanics at the Synaptic Cleft
3.5 Penrose and Hameroff: Quantum Gravity and Microtubuli
4. Quantum Mind
4.1 Applying Quantum Concepts to Mental Systems
4.2 Concrete Applications
5. Mind and Matter as Dual Aspects
5.1 Compositional and Decompositional Approaches
5.2 Pauli-Jung Conjecture
5.3 Mind-Matter Correlations and the Role of Meaning
6. Conclusions
Bibliography
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. Introduction
The problem of how mind and matter are related to each other has many
facets, and it can be approached from many different starting points.
The historically leading disciplines in this respect are philosophy
and psychology, which were later joined by behavioral science,
cognitive science and neuroscience. In addition, the physics of
complex systems and quantum physics have played stimulating roles in
the discussion from their beginnings.
As regards the issue of complexity, this is evident: the brain is one
of the most complex systems we know. The study of neural networks,
their relation to the operation of single neurons and other important
topics do and will profit a lot from complex systems approaches. As
regards quantum physics, there can be no reasonable doubt that quantum
events occur and are efficacious in the brain as elsewhere in the
material world—including biological
systems.[1]
But it is controversial whether these events are efficacious and
relevant for those aspects of brain activity that are correlated with
mental activity.
The original motivation in the early 20th century for relating quantum
theory to consciousness was essentially philosophical. It is fairly
plausible that conscious free decisions (“free will”) are
problematic in a perfectly deterministic
world,[2]
so quantum randomness might indeed open up novel possibilities for
free will. (On the other hand, randomness is problematic for
goal-directed volition!)
Quantum theory introduced an element of randomness standing out
against the previous deterministic worldview preceding it, in which
randomness expresses our ignorance of a more detailed description (as
in statistical mechanics). In sharp contrast to such epistemic
randomness, quantum randomness in processes such as the spontaneous
emission of light, radioactive decay, or other examples has been
considered a fundamental feature of nature, independent of our
ignorance or knowledge. To be precise, this feature refers to
individual quantum events, whereas the behavior of
ensembles of such events is statistically
determined. The indeterminism of individual quantum events is
constrained by statistical laws.
Other features of quantum theory, which became attractive in
discussing issues of consciousness, were the concepts of
complementarity and entanglement. Pioneers of quantum physics such as
Planck, Bohr, Schrödinger, Pauli (and others) emphasized the
various possible roles of quantum theory in reconsidering the old
conflict between physical determinism and conscious free will. For
informative overviews with different focal points see e.g., Squires
(1990), Kane (1996), Butterfield (1998), Suarez and Adams (2013).
2. Philosophical Background Assumptions
Variants of the dichotomy between mind and matter range from their
fundamental distinction at a primordial level of description to the
emergence of mind (consciousness) from the brain as an extremely
sophisticated and highly developed material system. Early overviews
can be found in Popper and Eccles (1977), Chalmers (1996), and Pauen
(2001).
One important aspect of all discussions about the relation between
mind and matter is the distinction between descriptive and
explanatory approaches. For instance, correlation is
a descriptive term with empirical relevance, while causation
is an explanatory term associated with theoretical attempts to
understand correlations. Causation implies correlations between cause
and effect, but this does not always apply the other way around:
correlations between two systems can result from a common cause in
their history rather than from a direct causal interaction. Moreover,
correlations can be synchronic rather than diachronic, so the temporal
distance that is presupposed by cause-effect relations is lacking
altogether.
In the fundamental sciences, one typically speaks of causal relations
in terms of interactions. In physics, for instance, there are four
fundamental kinds of interactions (electromagnetic, weak, strong,
gravitational) which serve to explain the correlations that are
observed in physical systems. As regards the mind-matter problem, the
situation is more difficult. Far from a theoretical understanding in
this field, the existing body of knowledge essentially consists of
empirical correlations between material and mental states. These
correlations are synchronic, not diachronic; neither are mental states
causally conditioned by brain states nor the other way around. It is
(for some purposes) interesting to know that particular brain
areas are activated during particular mental activities; but this
does, of course, not explain why they are.
In many discussions of material [ma] brain states and mental [me]
states of consciousness, the relations between them are conceived in a
direct way
(A):
\[
[\mathbf{ma}] \substack{\leftarrow \\ \rightarrow} [\mathbf{me}]
\]
The most popular approaches along these lines as far as quantum
behavior of the brain is concerned will be discussed in
Section 3,
“Quantum Brain”.
The scheme (A) of direct relations between material and mental states
sketches a minimal framework to study reduction, supervenience, or
emergence relations (Kim 1998; Stephan 1999) which can yield both
monistic and dualistic pictures. For instance, the idea of strong
reduction assumes that all mental states and properties can be
reduced to the material domain or even to physics. This point of view
claims that it is both necessary and sufficient to explore and
understand the material domain, e.g., the brain, in order to
understand the mental domain, e.g., consciousness. It leads to a
monistic picture, in which any need to discuss mental states is
eliminated right away or at least considered as epiphenomenal. While
mind-brain correlations are still legitimate though causally
irrelevant from an epiphenomenalist point of view, eliminative
materialism renders even correlations themselves irrelevant.
Counterarguments against the validity of such strongly reductive
approaches are qualia arguments, emphasizing their impossibility to
properly incorporate the quality of the subjective experience of a
mental state, the “what it is like to be” (Nagel 1974) in
that state. This leads to an explanatory gap between third-person and
first-person accounts for which Chalmers (1995) has coined the notion
of the “hard problem of consciousness”. Another, less
discussed counterargument is that the physical domain itself is not
causally closed. Any solution of fundamental equations of motion (be
it experimentally, numerically, or analytically) requires to fix
boundary conditions and initial conditions which are not given by the
fundamental laws of nature (Primas 2002). This causal gap applies to
classical physics as well as quantum physics, where a basic
indeterminacy due to collapse makes it even more challenging. A third
class of counterarguments refer to the difficulties to include notions
of temporal present and nowness in a physical description (Franck
2004, 2008; Primas 2017).
However, relations between mental and material states can also be
conceived in a non-reductive fashion, e.g. in terms of emergence
relations (Stephan 1999). Mental states and/or properties can be
considered as emergent if the material brain is not necessary or not
sufficient to explore and understand
them.[3]
This leads to a dualistic picture (less radical and more plausible
than Cartesian dualism) in which residua remain if one attempts to
reduce the mental to the material. Within a dualistic scheme of
thinking, it becomes inevitable to discuss the question of how mental
and material states are related to one another. This topic has
attracted growing interest under the notion of “downward
causation” (Velmans 2002; Ellis et al. 2011). Since
such causation would be synchronic rather than diachronic, a less
controversial concept addressing this issue has been proposed in terms
of “downward constraints” that mental states impose on
brain states (Atmanspacher and beim Graben 2007).
It has been an old idea by Niels Bohr that central conceptual features
of quantum theory, such as complementarity, are also of pivotal
significance outside the domain of physics. In fact, Bohr became
familiar with complementarity through the psychologist Edgar Rubin
and, more indirectly, William James (Holton 1970) and immediately saw
its potential for quantum physics. Although Bohr was convinced of the
extraphysical relevance of complementarity, he never elaborated this
idea in concrete detail, and for a long time after him no one else did
so either. This situation has changed: there are now a number of
research programs generalizing key notions of quantum theory in a way
that makes them applicable beyond physics.
Of particular interest for consciousness studies are approaches that
have been developed in order to pick up Bohr’s proposal with
respect to psychology and cognitive science. The first steps in this
direction were made by the group of Aerts in the early 1990s (Aerts
et al. 1993), using non-distributive propositional lattices
to address quantum-like behavior in non-classical systems. Alternative
approaches have been initiated by Khrennikov (1999), focusing on
non-classical probabilities, and Atmanspacher et al. (2002),
outlining an algebraic framework with non-commuting operations. The
recent development of ideas within this framework of thinking is
addressed in
Section 4,
“Quantum Mind”. Other lines of thinking are due to Primas
(2007, 2017), addressing complementarity with partial Boolean
algebras, and Filk and von Müller (2008), indicating links
between basic conceptual categories in quantum physics and
psychology.
As an alternative to (A), it is possible to conceive mind-matter
relations indirectly
(B),
via a third category:
\[\begin{gather}
[\mathbf{ma}] \quad [\mathbf{me}] \\
\searrow\nwarrow \swarrow\nearrow \\
[\mathbf{mame}]
\end{gather}\]
This third category, here denoted [mame], is regarded as being neutral
with respect to the distinction between [ma] and [me], i.e.,
psychophysically neutral. In scenario (B), issues of reduction and
emergence concern the relation between the undivided “background
reality” [mame] and the distinguished aspects [ma] and [me].
Such “dual-aspect” frameworks of thinking have received
increasing attention in contemporary discussion. In occidental
philosophy, they have a long tradition reaching back as far as to
Spinoza (1677) and Schelling (1809). In the early days of
psychophysics, Fechner (1861) and Wundt (1911) advocated related
views. Whitehead, the modern pioneer of process philosophy, referred
to mental and physical poles of “actual occasions”, which
themselves transcend their bipolar appearances (Whitehead 1978). Many
approaches in the tradition of Feigl (1967) and Smart (1963), called
“identity theories”, conceive mental and material states
as differentiated descendants of “central states”. Other
variants of this idea, focusing on quantum ideas, have been suggested
by (a) Jung and Pauli (1955) [see also Meier (2001)], involving
Jung’s conception of a psychophysically neutral, archetypal
order, by (b) approaches toward a neither-mental-nor-material base
reality by Eddington (1946) and Wheeler (1994), and by (c) Bohm and
Hiley (Bohm 1990; Bohm and Hiley 1993; Hiley 2001), referring to an
implicate order which unfolds into the different explicate domains of
the mental and the material. They will be discussed in more detail in
Section 5,
“Brain and Mind as Dual Aspects”.
Velmans (2002, 2009) has developed a similar approach, backed up with
empirical material from psychology, and Strawson (2003) has proposed a
“real materialism” which uses a closely related scheme.
Another proponent of dual-aspect thinking is Chalmers (1996), who
considers the possibility that the underlying, psychophysically
neutral level of description could be best characterized in terms of
information.
Before proceeding further, it should be emphasized that many
present-day approaches prefer to distinguish between first-person and
third-person perspectives rather than mental and material states. This
terminology serves to highlight the discrepancy between immediate
conscious experiences (“qualia”) and their description, be
it behavioral, neural, or biophysical. The notion of the “hard
problem” of consciousness research refers to bridging the gap
between first-person experience and third-person accounts of it. In
the present contribution, mental conscious states are implicitly
assumed to be related to first-person experience. This does not mean,
however, that the problem of how to define consciousness precisely is
considered as resolved. Ultimately, it will be (at least) as difficult
to define a mental state in rigorous terms as it is to define a
material state rigorously.
3. Quantum Brain
In this section, some popular approaches for applying quantum theory
to brain states will be surveyed and compared, most of them
speculative, with varying degrees of elaboration and viability.
Section 3.1
addresses three different neurophysiological levels of description,
to which particular quantum approaches refer. Subsequently, the
individual approaches themselves will be presented and discussed
—
Section 3.2:
Stapp,
Section 3.3:
Vitiello and Freeman,
Section 3.4:
Beck and Eccles,
Section 3.5:
Penrose and Hameroff. For this purpose, the philosophical
distinctions A/B
(Section 2)
and the neurophysiological distinctions addressed in
Section 3.1
will serve as guidelines to classify the respective quantum
approaches in a systematic way. However, some preliminary
qualifications concerning different ways to use quantum theory are in
order.
There are quite a number of accounts discussing quantum theory in
relation to consciousness that adopt basic ideas of quantum theory in
a purely narrative manner. Quantum theoretical terms such as
entanglement, superposition, collapse, complementarity, and others are
used without specific reference to how they are defined precisely and
how they are applicable to specific situations. For instance,
conscious acts are just claimed to be interpretable somehow
similarly to physical acts of measurement, or correlations in
psychological systems are just claimed to be interpretable
somehow similarly to physical entanglement. Such accounts may provide
fascinating science fiction, and they may even be important to inspire
nuclei of ideas to be worked out in detail. But unless such detailed
work leads beyond vague allusions and intimations, they do not yet
represent scientific progress. Approaches falling into this category
will not be further discussed in this contribution.
A second category includes approaches that use the status quo
of present-day quantum theory to describe neurophysiological and/or
neuropsychological processes. Among these approaches, the one with the
longest history was initiated by von Neumann in the 1930s, later taken
up by Wigner, and then championed by Stapp. It can be roughly
characterized as the proposal to consider intentional conscious acts
as intrinsically correlated with physical state reductions. Another
fairly early idea dating back to Ricciardi and Umezawa in the 1960s is
to treat mental states, particularly memory states, in terms of vacuum
states of quantum fields. A prominent proponent of this approach is
Vitiello. Finally, there is the idea suggested by Beck and Eccles in
the 1990s, according to which quantum mechanical processes, relevant
for the description of exocytosis at the synaptic cleft, can be
influenced by mental intentions.
The third category refers to further developments or
generalizations of present-day quantum theory. An obvious
candidate in this respect is the proposal by Penrose to relate
elementary conscious acts to gravitation-induced reductions of quantum
states. Ultimately, this requires the framework of a future theory of
quantum gravity which is far from having been developed. Together with
Penrose, Hameroff has argued that microtubuli might be the right place
to look for such state reductions.
3.1 Neurophysiological Levels of Description
A mental system can be in many different conscious (intentional,
phenomenal) mental states. In a hypothetical state space, a sequence
of such states forms a trajectory representing what is often called
the stream of consciousness. Since different subsets of the state
space are typically associated with different stability properties, a
mental state can be assumed to be more or less stable, depending on
its position in the state space. Stable states are distinguished by a
residence time at that position longer than that of metastable or
unstable states. If a mental state is stable with respect to
perturbations, it “activates” a mental representation
encoding a content that is consciously perceived.
Neural Assemblies
Moving from this purely psychological, or cognitive, description to
its neurophysiological counterpart leads us to the question: What is
the neural correlate of a mental representation? According to standard
accounts (cf. Noë and Thompson (2004) for discussion), mental
representations are correlated with the activity of neuronal
assemblies, i.e., ensembles of several thousands of coupled neurons.
The neural correlate of a mental representation can be characterized
by the fact that the connectivities, or couplings, among those neurons
form an assembly confined with respect to its environment, to which
connectivities are weaker than within the assembly. The neural
correlate of a mental representation is activated if the neurons
forming the assembly operate more actively, e.g., produce higher
firing r