Life | Definition, Origin, Evolution, Diversity, & Facts | Britannica
Search Britannica
Click here to search
Search Britannica
Click here to search
SUBSCRIBE
SUBSCRIBE
Login
https://premium.britannica.com/premium-membership/?utm_source=premium&utm_medium=nav-login-box&utm_campaign=evergreen
SUBSCRIBE
Home
History & Society
Science & Tech
Biographies
Animals & Nature
Geography & Travel
Arts & Culture
ProCon
Money
Games & Quizzes
Videos
On This Day
One Good Fact
Dictionary
New Articles
History & Society
Lifestyles & Social Issues
Philosophy & Religion
Politics, Law & Government
World History
Science & Tech
Health & Medicine
Science
Technology
Biographies
Browse Biographies
Animals & Nature
Birds, Reptiles & Other Vertebrates
Bugs, Mollusks & Other Invertebrates
Environment
Fossils & Geologic Time
Mammals
Plants
Geography & Travel
Geography & Travel
Arts & Culture
Entertainment & Pop Culture
Literature
Sports & Recreation
Visual Arts
Image Galleries
Podcasts
Summaries
Top Questions
Britannica Kids
Ask the Chatbot
Games & Quizzes
History & Society
Science & Tech
Biographies
Animals & Nature
Geography & Travel
Arts & Culture
ProCon
Money
Videos
life
Table of Contents
IntroductionDefinitions of lifeMetabolicPhysiologicalBiochemicalGeneticThermodynamicAutopoieticLife on EarthThe biosphereChemistry of lifeDNA, RNA, and proteinChemistry in commonModes of nutrition and energy generationEnergy, carbon, and electronsATPDiversityProkaryotes and eukaryotesMulticellularityClassification and microbiotaSexVirusesLimits to lifeTemperature and desiccationRadiation and nutrient deprivationSizes of organismsMetabolites and waterSensory capabilities and awarenessPhotosensitivity, audiosensitivity, thermosensitivity, chemosensitivity, and magnetosensitivitySensing with technologyEvolution and the history of life on EarthHeritabilityConvergenceSpontaneous generationGeologic recordThe origin of lifeHypotheses of originsProduction of polymersThe earliest living systems
References & Edit History
Related Topics
Images, Videos & Interactives
For Students
life summary
Quizzes
Facts You Should Know: The Human Body Quiz
Biology Bonanza
Related Questions
What is a cell?
What is cell theory?
What do cell membranes do?
Contents
Science
Biology
African elephants
A herd of African elephants (Loxodonta africana) drinking from the Chobe River, Botswana.
(more)
life
biology
Ask the Chatbot a Question
More Actions
Print
print
Print
Please select which sections you would like to print:
Table Of Contents
Cite
verifiedCite
While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be some discrepancies.
Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions.
Select Citation Style
MLA
APA
Chicago Manual of Style
Copy Citation
Share
Share
Share to social media
Facebook
X
URL
https://www.britannica.com/science/life
Feedback
External Websites
Feedback
Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article (requires login).
Feedback Type
Select a type (Required)
Factual Correction
Spelling/Grammar Correction
Link Correction
Additional Information
Other
Your Feedback
Submit Feedback
Thank you for your feedback
Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article.
External Websites
National Center for Biotechnology Information - PubMed Central - What is life? Prerequisites for a Definition (PDF)
University of Minnesota Pressbooks - Introductory Biology: Evolutionary and Ecological Perspectives - Definition of Life
University of Hawaii - Exploring Our Fluid Earth - Properties of Life
Biology LibreTexts - Lifeï¿½s Diversity and Origins
Khan Academy - What is life?
Frontiers - Frontiers in Astronomy and Space Sciences - What is Life?
Academia - What is life? (PDF)
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy - Life
Ask the Chatbot a Question
Written by
Carl Sagan
Astronomer and science writer Carl Sagan (1934-96) was a highly popular and influential figure in the United States and controversial in scientific, political, and religious circles for his views on extraterrestrial...
Carl Sagan,
Lynn Margulis
Distinguished University Professor, University of Massachusetts, Amherst. Coauthor of Five Kingdoms: An Illustrated Guide to the Phyla of Life on Earth; What Is Life?; and others.
Lynn Margulis•All
Fact-checked by
The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica
Encyclopaedia Britannica's editors oversee subject areas in which they have extensive knowledge, whether from years of experience gained by working on that content or via study for an advanced degree. They write new content and verify and edit content received from contributors.
The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica
Last Updated:
Jun 14, 2025
•
Article History
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
Ask the Chatbot
Related Topics:
evolution
cell
metabolism
heredity
death
(Show more)
On the Web:
Academia - What is life? (PDF) (June 14, 2025)
(Show more)
See all related content
Streptococcus pyogenesScanning electron micrograph of Streptococcus pyogenes, associated with strep throat and scarlet fever.(more)life,  living matter and, as such, matter that shows certain attributes that include responsiveness, growth, metabolism, energy transformation, and reproduction. Although a noun, as with other defined entities, the word life might be better cast as a verb to reflect its essential status as a process. Life comprises individuals, living beings, assignable to groups (taxa). Each individual is composed of one or more minimal living units, called cells, and is capable of transformation of carbon-based and other compounds (metabolism), growth, and participation in reproductive acts. Life-forms present on Earth today have evolved from ancient common ancestors through the generation of hereditary variation and natural selection. Although some studies state that life may have begun as early as 4.1 billion years ago, it can be traced to fossils dated to 3.5–3.7 billion years ago, which is still only slightly younger than Earth, which gravitationally accreted into a planet about 4.5 billion years ago. But this is life as a whole. More than 99.9 percent of species that have ever lived are extinct. The several branches of science that reveal the common historical, functional, and chemical basis of the evolution of all life include electron microscopy, genetics, paleobiology (including paleontology), and molecular biology.1 of 2mangrove roots, ThailandMangroves (Rhizophora apiculata) at low tide on the coast of Thailand.(more)2 of 2bald eagleBald eagle perching on a snag in Kenai, Alaska.(more)The phenomenon of life can be approached in several ways: life as it is known and studied on planet Earth; life imaginable in principle; and life, by hypothesis, that might exist elsewhere in the universe (see extraterrestrial life). As far as is known, life exists only on Earth. Most life-forms reside in a thin sphere that extends about 23 km (14 miles) from 3 km (2 miles) beneath the bottom of the ocean to the top of the troposphere (lower atmosphere); the relative thickness is comparable to a coat of paint on a rubber ball. An estimated 10–30 million distinguishable species currently inhabit this sphere of life, or biosphere.Definitions of lifereed frogReed frog perched on a lily.(more)Much is known about life from points of view reflected in the various biological, or “life,” sciences. These include anatomy (the study of form at the visible level), ultrastructure (the study of form at the microscopic level), physiology (the study of function), molecular biology and biochemistry (the study of form and function at chemical levels), ecology (the study of the relations of organisms with their environments), taxonomy (the naming, identifying, and classifying of organisms), ethology (the study of animal behaviour), and sociobiology (the study of social behaviour). Specific sciences that participate in the study of life focus more narrowly on certain taxa or levels of observation—e.g., botany (the study of plants), lichenology (the study of lichens, leafy or crusty individuals composed of permanent associations between algae or photosynthetic bacteria and fungi), herpetology (the study of amphibians and reptiles), microbiology (the study of bacteria, yeast, and other unicellular fungi, archaea, protists, viruses), zoology (the study of marine and land animals), and cytology (the study of cells). Although the scientists, technicians, and others who participate in studies of life easily distinguish living matter from inert or dead matter, none can give a completely inclusive, concise definition of life itself. Part of the problem is that the core properties of life—growth, change, reproduction, active resistance to external perturbation, and evolution—involve transformation or the capacity for transformation. Living processes are thus antithetical to a desire for tidy classification or final definition. To take one example, the number of chemical elements involved with life has increased with time; an exhaustive list of the material constituents of life would therefore be premature. Nonetheless, most scientists implicitly use one or more of the metabolic, physiological, biochemical, genetic, thermodynamic, and autopoietic definitions given below.MetabolicMetabolic definitions are popular with biochemists and some biologists. Living systems are objects with definite boundaries, continually exchanging some materials with their surroundings but without altering their general properties, at least over some period of time. However, there are exceptions. There are frozen seeds and spores that remain, so far as is known, perfectly dormant. At low temperatures they lack metabolic activity for hundreds, perhaps thousands, of years but revive perfectly well upon being subjected to more clement conditions. A candle flame has a well-defined shape with a fixed boundary and is maintained by “metabolizing” its organic waxes and the surrounding molecular oxygen to produce carbon dioxide and water. Similar reactions, incidentally, occur in animals and plants. Flames also have a well-known capacity for growth. These facts underscore the inadequacy of this metabolic definition, even as they suggest the indispensable role of energy transformation to living systems. (See metabolism.)PhysiologicalVenus flytrapActive traps of the Venus flytrap (Dionaea muscipula), a carnivorous plant. If depressed at least twice, thin pressure-sensitive hairs in the trap stimulate the lobes to clamp tightly over an insect.(more)Physiological definitions of life are popular. Life is defined as any system capable of performing functions such as eating, metabolizing, excreting, breathing, moving, growing, reproducing, and responding to external stimuli. But many such properties are either present in machines that nobody is willing to call alive or absent from organisms, such as the dormant hard-covered seed of a tree, that everybody is willing to call alive. An automobile, for example, can be said to eat, metabolize, excrete, breathe, move, and be responsive to external stimuli. A visitor from another planet, judging from the enormous number of automobiles on Earth and the way in which cities and landscapes have been designed for the special benefit of motorcars, might well believe that automobiles are not only alive but are the dominant life-form on the planet. (See physiology.)
Britannica Quiz
Facts You Should Know: The Human Body Quiz
BiochemicalA biochemical or molecular biological definition sees living organisms as systems that contain reproducible hereditary information coded in nucleic acid molecules and that metabolize by controlling the rate of chemical reactions using the proteinaceous catalysts known as enzymes. In many respects, this is more satisfying than the physiological or metabolic definitions of life. However, even here there are counterexamples. Viruslike agents called prions lack nucleic acids, although the nucleic acids of the animal cells in which they reside may be involved in their reproduction. Ribonucleic acid (RNA) molecules may replicate, mutate, and then replicate their mutations in test tubes, although by themselves they are not alive. Furthermore, a definition strictly in chemical terms seems peculiarly vulnerable. It implies that, were a person able to construct a system that had all the functional properties of life, it would still not be alive if it lacked the molecules that earthly biologists are fond of—and made of. (See biochemistry.)